<html>
<head>
    <title>IDS Server Release Notes</title>
</head>
<body>

<h1>IDS Server Release Notes</h1>

<h2>2.1.1</h2>
<p>Bug fix release</p>
<ul>
    <li>#164, #166: Fix duplicate calls of mainStorage.lock() in LockManager.</li>
    <li>#140, #158: Fix miredot build.</li>
    <li>Deprecate the putAsPost call.</li>
</ul>

<h2>2.1.0</h2>
<ul>
    <li>#155, #156: Set Content-Length header in responses sending
        only a single file
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>2.0.0</h2>
<p>Make the transition to Payara 6</p>
<ul>
    <li>#138: Upgrade to Java 11 and JakartaEE 10 API for compatibility with Payara 6</li>
    <li>#139: Remove getApiVersion call, deprecated in 1.8.0.
        Remove runtime property writeDelaySeconds, deprecated in 1.10.0.
        Deprecate FileChecker and getLink call
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.12.2</h2>
<p>Bug fix release</p>
<ul>
    <li>#164, #165: Fix duplicate calls of mainStorage.lock() in LockManager.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.12.1</h2>
<ul>
    <li>#122: Bump dependency on logback-classic to version 1.2.0.</li>
    <li>#134: Bump dependency on commons-fileupload to version 1.5</li>
    <li>#128: Use python3 instead of python in the interpreter line of Python scripts</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.12.0</h2>
<p>Improve performance in some cases</p>
<ul>
    <li>#115, #118: Work around an issue in icat.server
        that causes queries to take much longer then tolerable.
    </li>
    <li>#116: Bump icat.utils to version 4.16.1.</li>
    <li>#113: Bump dependency on junit to version 4.13.1.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.11.0</h2>
<p>Various small enhancements</p>
<ul>
    <li>#104, #110: Extend getStatus() and getSize() to accept a preparedID.</li>
    <li>#105, #106: Add an optional configuration option enableWrite.</li>
    <li>#108: The API calls archive, restore, and write throw NotImplementedException in
        the case of single level storage.
    </li>
    <li>#103: Bump dependency on commons-fileupload to version 1.3.3.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.10.1</h2>
<p>Bug fix release</p>
<ul>
    <li>#101: Fix write call fails with DataNotOnlineError if an ARCHIVE request is
        pending.
    </li>
    <li>Documentation fixes.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.10.0</h2>
<p>Add file system locking in the storage plugin</p>
<ul>
    <li>#80: Call mainStorage.lock(DsInfo, boolean) whenever a dataset is locked
        internally. This call has been added to MainStorageInterface ids.plugin
        1.5.0. The plugin may implement this call to acquire a file system lock.
        This would then allow safe concurrent access to main storage for other
        processes.
    </li>
    <li>#94: Add new configuration properties delayDatasetWritesSeconds and
        delayDatafileOperationsSeconds, replacing writeDelaySeconds. Deprecate
        writeDelaySeconds.
    </li>
    <li>#96: Error handling in DsRestorer in the case of a corrupt ZIP archive.</li>
    <li>Require ids.plugin 1.5.0.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.9.1</h2>
<p>Bug fix release</p>
<ul>
    <li>#87: Fix uncaught exception in DfRestorer can cause restoration to stall until
        IDS is restarted.
    </li>
    <li>#85: Fix once again JMS Session not closed if an exception is thrown. The
        previous fix from 1.9.0 was not thread safe.
    </li>
    <li>#92: Fix: must escape single quote character in datafile location values when
        building JPQL queries.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.9.0</h2>
<p>Add a new Write API call and review the internal locking</p>
<ul>
    <li>#67: Add a new Write API call that triggers write to archive storage.</li>
    <li>#59: Review of the internal locking mechanism which fixes various race
        conditions.
    </li>
    <li>#63: Ignore Datafiles having the location attribute not set.</li>
    <li>#84: Change the HTTP status returned on DataNotOnlineException to 503.</li>
    <li>#85: Fix JMS Session not closed if an exception is thrown.</li>
    <li>#75: Add a configuration option "testHome" to be set in settings.xml. Files are
        created relative to this directory when running the tests.
    </li>
    <li>Tests are now independent of locale.</li>
    <li>Glassfish 4.0 is no longer supported</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.8.0</h2>
<p>Bug fix release - with new style deployment</p>
<ul>
    <li>Workaround for oracle planning bug</li>
    <li>Make the implementation of getSize much more efficient.</li>
    <li>Modified a ContainerResponseFilter to allow Content-Type
        headers to be transmitted properly.
    </li>
    <li>Provided a restful "version" call. The getApiVersion call is
        marked as deprecated.
    </li>
    <li>Make isPrepared more efficient.</li>
    <li>Ensure that Tidier action runs at high priority.</li>
    <li>Plugins need a slightly different interface - hence the move
        to 1.8.0
    </li>
    <li>File checker for Datasets no longer generates an error for an
        empty Dataset
    </li>
    <li>Add list of failed restores to the information returned by
        getServiceStatus.
    </li>
    <li>Avoid marking files as unavailable when unsure</li>
    <li>The prepareData call resets flags marking previous restore
        failures.
    </li>
</ul>


<h2>1.7.0</h2>
<p>Deal with multiple Datafiles with the same location and bug
    fixes</p>
<ul>
    <li>If the icat.url in the ids.properties file contains a
        recognised wsdl suffix it will be removed. It is better not to
        include any suffix however.
    </li>
    <li>It is now permissible to have multiple Datafiles with the
        same location. The IDS has no mechanism to write such as structure
        however it can arise from an icat call to the cloneEntity operation
        or by storing and cataloguing data outside the IDS. It is possible
        for the getSize call to be inaccurate however as a physical file may
        be counted more than once.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.6.0</h2>
<p>Checks the value of maxEntities from the ICAT it is using and
    various improvements and bug fixes.</p>
<ul>
    <li>No attempt will be made to restore a file when it is already
        on-line
    </li>
    <li>The server checks the value of maxEntities from the ICAT it
        is using to avoid generating queries that will fail in ICAT.
    </li>
    <li>The messages from the file checker have been improved when
        storage is by dataset and a zip file is found to be corrupt.
    </li>
    <li>Now waits for ICAT connection if ICAT not available at
        startup.
    </li>
    <li>Protect against non numeric values being passed to the put
        call.
    </li>
    <li>Produces JMS logging for all calls as specified in the
        ids.properties file
    </li>
    <li>Moved to the latest icat.utils to support multiple containers</li>
    <li>Uses logback via slf4j rather than log4j via slf4j</li>
    <li>A race condition has been avoided which could have resulted
        in the loss of data
    </li>
    <li>If writing to secondary storage fails then archive is
        inhibited for that data set or data file. This is to prevent data
        loss.
    </li>
    <li>Code changed to be more efficient when dealing with very
        large investigations or data sets.
    </li>
    <li>container specified in ids-setup.properties must an entry
        from <a target="_blank"
                href="http://www.eclipse.org/eclipselink/api/2.6/org/eclipse/persistence/config/TargetServer.html">TargetServer</a>
        Though only Glassfish is working properly at the moment.
    </li>

</ul>

<h2>1.5.0</h2>
<p>New getDatafileIds, getIcatUrl and improved performance of
    prepareData.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Added getDatafileIds call.</li>
    <li>Improved performance of prepareData by performing some
        operations asynchronously.
    </li>
    <li>Changed values of filesCheck.lastIdFile and
        filesCheck.errorLog to be relative to ../data/ids rather than
        ../data/icat in the ids.properties.example file.
    </li>
    <li>getStatus allows sessionId to be null.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.4.0</h2>
<p>New getIcatUrl and now uses icat 4.5 client.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Bug fix release to fix handling of corrupt
        filesCheck.lastIdFile file.
    </li>
    <li>Work with icat 4.5</li>
    <li>Added getIcatUrl call.</li>
    <li>All calls now produce CORS headers.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.3.1</h2>
<p>Bug fix release to fix file handle leak.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Minor corrections to the documentation.</li>
    <li>Ensure that files are closed when returned individually.</li>
    <li>Remove redundant (and possibly dangerous) line of code from
        DsWriter.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.3.0</h2>
<p>Add getApiVersion call, make major change to prepareData, make
    it also support archive by datafile and provide the option of
    protecting Datafile.location with a cryptographic hash.</p>
<ul>
    <li>getApiVersion call added to return version of server</li>
    <li>ids.properties values: preparedCacheSize1024bytes,
        datasetCacheSize1024bytes, compressDatasetCache, and
        tolerateWrongCompression are no longer used.
    </li>
    <li>ids.properties value preparedCount has changed its meaning.</li>
    <li>ids.properties value tidyBlockSize has been added.</li>
    <li>ids.properties value maxIdsInQuery has been added.</li>
    <li>The json string returned by getServiceStatus has changed.</li>
    <li>The Datafile.location value can be protected by a
        cryptographic hash. This is enabled by adding a property "key" to the
        ids.properties file.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.2.0</h2>
<p>For two level storage clean up main storage as needed.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Add parameters: startArchivingLevel1024bytes,
        stopArchivingLevel1024bytes and linkLifetimeSeconds.
    </li>
    <li>Cope with some obscure file checker errors.</li>
    <li>Datasets are archived when main storage becomes too full.</li>
</ul>

<h2>1.1.0</h2>
<p>Provide background file checking and facility control of
    returned zip file structure.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Another file handle leak fixed.</li>
    <li>Compatible with plugin interface 1.1.0.</li>
    <li>Provide background file checking - which requires that the
        parameter checkFiles.parallelCount is set to an integer. If the
        integer is non zero then other entries must be set in the
        ids.properties file.
    </li>
    <li>ids.properties needs a new parameter: plugin.zipMapper.class
        which identifies the code to define the zip file structure.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.0.1</h2>
<p>Bug fix release.</p>
<ul>
    <li>Files are now being closed properly to avoid running out of
        file handles.
    </li>
</ul>

<h2>1.0.0</h2>
<p>Initial public release.</p>

</body>
</html>
